This was my first horror novel. According to a few scattered reviews, since our literary criticism is famously scant, it works. According to readers, it sold almost overwhelmingly. I could attend very little of the International Book Fair at which the book was launched, at a launch that was, I must confess, rather thinly attended.
Caught up in pressing personal matters, I was there barely twice in the ten days the event lasts. The first time was at that sparsely attended launch, where Grimorium shared the bill with a children's book from the same publisher. That same day, in the big bookshop, the main shop of the fairground, I nearly ran into an enormous table, round as King Arthur's, literally piled with copies of Grimorium stacked in several tall columns.
Still under the effect of the poor turnout, somewhat glum, I remember saying to the young woman in charge of the shop: I think you put out too many. I should say that at events I always go up to the booksellers, all the more when my own books are on sale, to ask how my titles are faring. And I should also say that there is no worse feeling for a writer, at least for the writer I am, than watching his books languish on a dusty shelf.
Imagine my surprise when, just four days later, I was able to return to the fairground and found the round table full. But with other titles. Grimorium had disappeared. Utterly incredulous, turning over possible reasons, a move to another storeroom, an order from somewhere, I went to ask about my books. They all sold, the manager of the shop told me with a smile.
Grimorium is a fortunate book in that sense. Asking around as always, however, I have learned that it barely reached the provinces, except Santiago de Cuba, home of Editorial Oriente. The three thousand copies of the print run disappeared at surprising speed. Since reprints are almost unheard of in Cuba, only the gods of literature know how many possible readers that book lost.
Although I have touched on supernatural and horrifying matters in the odd short story, I have not returned to the genre since the novel. I always make clear, and I have said it in several interviews, that my idea of horror goes hand in hand with atmospheres, states and airs, rather than with sudden appearances of creatures or fountains of blood and sticky substances.
Grimorium is a homage to the master Howard Phillips Lovecraft. Although there is indeed a higher entity in its pages, frightening and inexplicable, what I suppose is chilling is precisely that series of events that are never seen directly but that shape and strike the story to a great extent. My thanks to the fortunate readers. And I ask patience of those still waiting. Perhaps the Grimorium, by magic or otherwise, may yet reach them.
