This novel was written to be sent to a competition. It went out to compete not so much out of eagerness to win as because a prize in a competition is, in Cuba, one of the few quick ways of getting published within a more or less reasonable span of time. The competition is La Edad de Oro, the most important in my country for writers of fantasy and science fiction. And so, in 2014, El otro lado del espejo received an honourable mention there. Three years later it was published.
In a couple of interviews I have told the story of where the idea came from: a text by Jorge Luis Borges and Margarita Guerrero in The Book of Imaginary Beings. From that origin, and also in homage to Borges, came the inclusion of several objects and references from the work of the great southern writer, used freely within my story, without citing their literary origins and with no connection to his original stories. El otro lado del espejo was at the time one of the most complex stories I had written, given the many settings and times in which it unfolds.
Another novel written years later, a sort of prequel, also used the setting of the library. Not exactly the same library, but with a natural closeness and resemblance. So there remained a kind of beginning of a saga, of stories linked like communicating vessels, that promises at least a couple more novels. I say saga, but the two novels already written and, so far, those still to come, are works of fantasy that, although they share relationships, connections in time and space, settings and perhaps even characters, can be read independently. Not knowing one does not get in the way of understanding another.
El otro lado del espejo sold fortunately, though it is perhaps less known to readers, given its meagre print run, the complete absence of promotion, and the inscrutable designs of its distribution. It is one of my few books that never had a launch: one day it simply walked into the ring, and that was that.
Even so, the mere fact that it exists and was published is enough to be thankful for. Especially to Suntyan Irigoyen, who besides being its editor (she had worked before on El Escudo de Valnúss), put a great deal of her effort and work into bringing this book to light. May old Borges, besides forgiving me the audacity, bless this work through the eyes of its possible readers.
