Writing this novel had its fascinating moments and some very difficult ones. The protagonist, Daren Lebruit, is a psychopath. Writing him, getting inside his head, his obsessions, intentions and desires, turned out to be a difficult and at times twisted exercise. Many of the things the character learns in order to satisfy his desires, the writer had to learn first (in his mind, at least: luckily there was no need to kill anyone to hear how it sounded). That was how this murderer's acts and feelings gained the credibility they needed.
There are also two women at the centre of the story. One is an accomplished professional, a music producer, recently and painfully widowed. The other, her friend, is a journalist in love, somewhat free-spirited and a complete sceptic. As a touch of seasoning and a wink to the reader, the journalist writes for a magazine about the paranormal, of which she believes not a word, not even her own. Another character is a specialist in paranormal sound, and the friend and colleague he turns to for help is a Catholic priest and exorcist. There is also some police mystery, some crime, and a story of horrors that reaches from the past to find its ending in the present.
Although this is a work of fantasy, entirely imagined and with no basis in fact, it required research in many unrelated fields (the nature of sound and the demons of the Catholic universe, to name only two). It is one of the novels I most enjoyed writing and, at the same time, one of the furthest removed from the person this writer is. An utter enemy of violence and a confessed music lover, creating a character who delighted in the sounds of sadism was at times a difficult task.
It goes without saying that there is an explicit homage to Jean-Baptiste Grenouille, of Patrick Süskind's Perfume. It was a challenge to render the world by describing sounds, the way the terrible protagonist of these pages perceives it. I hope the horror can be heard in those words. But also, with more beautiful sounds, life, hope and love.
