This novel opened doors and roads that, at least for as long as I live, I do not think will close again. It was my first serious venture both into the long form and into the lands of fantasy. In good measure it gave me tangible satisfactions. I include on that list, above all, the obvious lessons of the trade: facing the writing of a novel with an almost monastic discipline, and then following every step involved in the birth of a book.
My first novel had a print run in the high thousands. Fortunately for the new author whose name was on it, the copies that reached the shelves sold well across the whole country. The book was well received, both by readers and by our scant literary criticism. I remember that every day, on my way home, I had to pass a bookshop, and I noticed, with a joy I will not hide, how the number of copies on display went down little by little. One report had it among the best-selling books of that summer. That, achieved without campaigns, without any publicity machine behind the author, without social media, without anyone promoting the book in the press, was without doubt an enormous achievement.
In fact, thanks to the magic of Cuban national distribution, over several editions of the International Book Fair and for several years, new copies of the novel would turn up in some remote warehouse in some province. It became a running joke to arrive at the Fair and ask the people selling whether there were Guerreras again. A few volumes even appeared for me at provincial fairs.
To the astonishment of this scribe, readers kept it in mind and, according to the booksellers, who know more about these things than anyone in Cuba, it always sold well. Needless to say, the author was paid nothing beyond the royalties for the first edition, and not a cent on those later sales. But at least it left the pleasant feeling of being read.
On more institutional ground, the book won the Premio La Rosa Blanca, awarded by the Writers' Section of the Union of Writers and Artists of Cuba. In personal terms, it was the start, the beginning, the setting out. I said more than once that this was the novel of first times. It was made with all the flaws and the lack of craft of a green author, but it was also full of every passion. And those, loving and magical, adventurous, warriors of their own lights, almost always hit the mark.
