Trovadoras, the book of interviews, had a complicated birth. The original text consisted of two long essays and that series of interviews. It all began with an essay competition held by Editorial Oriente. One morning the writer and teacher Aida Bahr, then head of the publishing house, called to tell me I had not won the prize. To my astonishment, since such courtesy towards those who lose is anything but usual, she told me the house wanted to publish the interviews that accompanied the two essays. In those three texts, in my own voice and in the voices of many of the protagonists themselves, some of the miracles and lives of Cuban women's trova were told.
That news brought joy, since the chance of a new book is always a joy, and doubt along with it. Publishing the interviews alone meant taking the book apart and leaving the two essays somewhat adrift, in a "for later" that always runs very long in my country. The master Eduardo Heras León cleared away my hesitation. Publish, always publish when there is a chance, he told me. He even let drop an idea, as consolation I think, though I have raised it into a prophecy for some day. Perhaps in your complete works, Chino Heras told me, you can publish it all together. But for now, publish the interviews, it will always be one more book, he advised.
So I did. Though, as I feared, the two essays were left drifting, at the mercy of fate. A few years later Editorial Capiro, despite the meagre print run, paid half my debt to those two texts. Convertida en canción. La imagen de la mujer en los textos de la Nueva Trova was published at last. The other is still waiting.
The essay traced some of the themes, reflections, contributions and portraits of the woman at the centre of countless trova songs. The fruit of long study, and of pleasurable listening, it also settled certain accounts with my years at Editorial de la Mujer. That work joined my usual subject, Cuban trova and above all the Nueva Trova, with my apprenticeship (not yet finished, nor closed) in the knowledge of gender. That field still has more to give.
For the moment, the interviews were published and the voices of several important Cuban women creators were brought to the foreground. Besides the heroines of my fiction, there are also women drawn from the strings and verses of songs. As I said in some interview, if women's place in society becomes better and higher, and if songs, and art, can also put their shoulder to that, the whole of society becomes better and higher.
The other essay and, why not, those complete works where the three texts might one day come together, remain alert, waiting, but on their way. In the meantime, there are interviews that sing.
