"And why don't you write me a story about dolls?"
That is what she said. It was in a corridor at Editorial de la Mujer. I was still in the editorial hangover of my first novel, Las guerreras de la luz. But I was already turning other stories over at the keyboard, and in my head.
To the proposal from Magaly Sánchez Ochoa, that sorceress of writing, then acting as compiler, I said yes without thinking. At that point I had written only a handful of realist stories; a heroic fantasy novel; a monster of an attempted novel, also realist; and a few pages of two other novels, fantasy as well. Although fantasy has readers of every age, I had never written anything aimed specifically at children. But I accepted. And I wrote. And it was published.
I do not know what Magaly saw in my future. I do not know what magic spell that request gave me. But from her proposal, from that first text, besides my first publication of children's literature as such, other stories and a fountain of characters were born. From that fulfilled genesis came, later, a book of stories, a novel, and even other characters for another saga that could well run to several books, with various plots and adventures. Some close friends and, above all, their children have learned a little of those wanderings. Even unpublished, those pages have already brought me good fruit.
The truth is that thanks to that request, to the enchantment that creator and sorceress gave me, to the good spell that spilled over me when I agreed to write, Brujito Sombrero, the doll Amalia and the horse Othar exist today. Later the fairy wand Magina would join them. Those characters first saw the light in this anthology from Editorial de la Mujer, which was very successful and in which I am proud to be included as an author. Today, years later, a novel with those beloved characters has been published. Other texts await the editorial miracle that will bring them back to life in the eyes of new readers, in new books that are on their way.
Thanks to that germinal request, this writer has a living memory, full of spells and happy births, to look back on. Nothing compares to the gift that brings characters and their stories. To you, Magaly Sánchez Ochoa, angel who whispered gifts and paths to me: may eternity turn out as fantastic for you as your written, or compiled, imaginings. Safe journey into the light. Thank you, Maga.
